Add changelog v0.30.0 (#34)
meilisearch/engine-team: meilisearch-release-changelog/v0.30.0.md

```

<!-- The following line should be put in the official release changelogs only -->
Read more about [cancelling tasks]().

Done in #2763 by @irevoire, @Kerollmops and @loiclec.

## Delete old processed tasks

To reduce the occupied space on your disk, you can remove the finished tasks (`succeeded`, `failed` or `canceled`) kept in the Meilisearch history.

When using the `DELETE /tasks`, you have to use one of the following query parameters to filter: `uid`, `status`, `type`, `indexUid`, or a date (using `afterXAt` and `beforeXAt` where `X` is `enqueued`, `started` or `finished`).

For example, to delete tasks by `uid`:

```bash
curl \
  -X DELETE 'http://localhost:7700/tasks?uid=1,2'
```

```json
{
  "taskUid": 3,
  "indexUid": null,
  "status": "enqueued",
  "type": "taskDeletion",
  "enqueuedAt": "2021-08-12T10:00:00.000000Z"
}
```

To delete all your tasks:

```bash
curl \
  -X DELETE 'http://localhost:7700/tasks?status=failed,succeeded,canceled'
```

<!-- The following line should be put in the official release changelogs only -->
Read more about [deleting finished tasks]().

Done in #2763 by @irevoire, @Kerollmops, and @loiclec.

## Remove downtime: swap indexes

> When doing important changes on a primary data store, you need them to be synchronized with Meilisearch. To avoid any downtime, Meilisearch now provides a seamless way to point to a new up-to-date index: swapping indexes.

Reviewer: I want to suggest something different than both of yours (sorry 🥺). 

The prior need is to deploy a new index version with 0 downtimes for search clients. 😇  The index swap being the solution to that, it makes sense to talk about it after 0 downtimes deployment focus. WDYT? I will suggest something before Monday if it's ok!

> When doing important changes on a primary data store, you need them to be synchronized with Meilisearch. To avoid any downtime, Meilisearch now provides a seamless way to point to a new up-to-date index: swapping indexes.

Author: Waiting for your suggestion then 😇

To swap indexes, use:

```bash
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/swap-indexes'\
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \

>   --data-binary '
>     [
>       { "indexes": ["indexA", "indexB"] }
>     ]
>   '

Reviewer 2: Keeping consistency with the docs code samples

```suggestion
  --data-binary '[
      { "indexes": ["indexA", "indexB"] }
  ]'
```

* Increase max concurrent readers from 126 to 1024 (#2830) @arriven
* Reduce the size of the Meilisearch binary: allow building without specialized tokenizations (#2773) @jirutka

# Behavior changes ⚠️

* Rename `receivedDocumentIds` into `matchedDocuments` in the task object when performing a [`delete-batch` action](https://docs.meilisearch.com/reference/api/documents.html#delete-documents-by-batch) (#2826) @Ugzuzg
* Change default bind address from `127.0.0.1` to `localhost`, making the default address available with IPv4 and IPv6 (#2861) @Fall1ngStar

# Fixes 🐞

* Improve the error message when adding documents: replace a meaningless serde message (#2819) @onyxcherry
* Fix `dumpCreation` tasks (#2890) @washbin
* Don't panic when the error length is slightly over 100 (#2727) @onyxcherry
* Fix phrase search (meilisearch/milli#639 and meilisearch/milli#647) @loiclec
* Fix filtering (meilisearch/milli#619) @loiclec
* Fix `facetDistribution` when setting `maxFacetPerValue` if a few documents are returned (meilisearch/milli#619) @loiclec

# Misc

* GitHub CIs and tests
  * Add dry run for publishing binaries: check the compilation works (#2726 and #2733) @curquiza

>   * Add CI to update the Meilisearch version in Cargo.toml files (#2741 and #2744) @curquiza

Author: ```suggestion
  * Add CI workflow to update the Meilisearch version in Cargo.toml files (#2741 and #2744) @curquiza
```

# v0.30.0 release changelogs

<!-- The following line should NOT be put in the official release changelogs -->
⚠️ Since this is a release candidate (RC), we do NOT recommend using it in a production environment. Something not working as expected? We welcome [bug reports](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/issues/new/choose) and [feedback about new features](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions).

> This release removes index deployment downtime and adds new task management features. It also introduces new search parameters that facilitate the creation of numbered pagination interfaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release introduces index deployment with zero downtime and adds task management features. It also brings the capability to navigate search results by page selection.
```

Thanks to Hacktoberfest, tons of updates and bug fixes have been done by the fantastic Meilisearch community. You were more present than ever and words cannot make justice tojust  how grateful we are for your support. A big thank you from the whole Meilisearch team! ❤️

<!-- The following line should NOT be put in the official release changelogs -->
📖 Meilisearch's official documentation will be ready for the official v0.30.0 release. Meanwhile, work-in-progress documentation is available [here]().

# New features and improvements 🔥

> ## Ease search results navigation with pagination

Author: Need input of @gmourier here

> ## Ease search results navigation with pagination

Reviewer: IMO, pagination implies a number; I find it a bit clumsy to say "Numbered pagination". The infinite scroll or load more methods are ways to navigate the search results, just like pagination, which is a different method.

> ## Ease search results navigation with pagination

Reviewer 3: I agree w/ Gui, "ease search result navigation" is not very clear.

Gui's suggestion is good, and matches the "verb first" formula followed by other features in the changelog ("delete old processed tasks", "remove downtime").

I disagree that "numbered pagination" is redundant, because unnumbered pagination also exists ("next page / previous page").

Perhaps something like this would work as a compromise?

`Improve search result navigation: create numbered pagination interfaces`

> ## Ease search results navigation with pagination

Reviewer: Thanks for the clarification, @guimachiavelli and @dichotommy. It makes sense!

I like reading `search result navigation` in the title because I know it relates to navigating search results at a glance. It's clearer to me 🎯

> ## Ease search results navigation with pagination

Reviewer 2: ok, that sounds good. I'll make the suggestion based on our discussion, then.

```suggestion
## Improve search result navigation: create numbered pagination interfaces
```

> You can now navigate through page selection when searching with Meilisearch using the API. This way, you will get the exact total number of pages and results Meilisearch has matched based on a query.
> 
> For this, use `page` and `hitsPerPage` as query parameter instead of `offset` and `limit`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now use `page` and `hitsPerPage` to fetch the total number of pages and results for a query. These new search parameters can be used in the place of `offset` and `limit` when creating interfaces that require knowing the exhaustive number of search results.

The following example fetches the second page of results for a given query:
```

Author: I would like the keep the pagination or navigation idea, WDYT? Same @gmourier WDYT?

Reviewer: Both proposals seem relevant to me. I would add first that it is possible to request a specific result page for a search query.

Reviewer 2: yeah, you're right, @curquiza. Edited my suggestion so we directly mention pagination.

```bash
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{ "q": "shifu", "page": "2", "hitsPerPage": "10" }'

```

```json
{
    "hits": [

>         /// ... 10 hits

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        // … 10 hits
```

    ],

>     /// ... other fields

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // …
```

    "hitsPerPage": 10,
    "totalHits": 2100,
    "totalPages": 210
}
```

Done in #2601 by @ManyTheFish.

## Cancel processing and enqueued tasks

> Meilisearch now allows you to cancel `enqueued` or `processing` tasks through a new API route, `/tasks/cancel`. This can be useful when you need to interrupt a process that is taking too much time to be completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Meilisearch now allows you to cancel `enqueued` or `processing` tasks through a new API route, `/tasks/cancel`.

This prevents starting from scratch with a fresh meilisearch install nor having to restart the instance in the following cases.

- Cancel a task that is taking too much time to be processed.
- Cancel tasks enqueued by mistake.
```

Author: It's a little bit too long from my POV to do the list. We are doing a changelog here, not a blog post
Will try to incorporate some of your points!

Author: For me, talking about canceling a task does not mean we need to talk about preventing starting with a Meilisearch from scratch. Yes, it's the workaround, but it brings a complex idea in a changelog that tries to be simple, and exhaustive of the changes.
WDYT @guimachiavelli?

Author: (I made a small change so far, this is still something I can change once we agree on a final version)

Author: I've written: `Meilisearch now allows you to cancel `enqueued` or `processing` tasks through a new API route, `/tasks/cancel`. This can be useful when you need to interrupt a task that is taking too much time to be completed or enqueued by mistake.`

Reviewer 2: > This prevents starting from scratch with a fresh meilisearch install

What is the relation between cancelling processing/enqueued tasks and fresh meilisearch installs?

Author: In the case people adding tasks too long to process (they want to cancel) or by mistake, people had to
- either wait for the task to be processed
- or kill their old instance, delete the data.ms, and start a new instance

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I agree, then. Talking about fresh installs introduces too many topics that do not relate directly to cancelling tasks. The changelog should give a very quick rundown of a feature and describe simple uses to illustrate it.

> To cancel a task, select it by specifying one of the following query parameters: `uid`, `status`, `type`, or `indexUid`. You can also select a task by date using one of the following query parameters: `afterEnqueuedAt`, `afterStartedAt`, `afterFinishedAt`, `beforeEnqueuedAt`,`beforeStartedAt`, or `beforeFinishedAt`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To cancel tasks, filters them by specifying one of the following query parameters: `uid`, `status`, `type`, or `indexUid`. 

Tasks can be filtered by date fields: 
- `beforeEnqueuedAt` / `afterEnqueuedAt`
- `beforeStartedAt` / `afterStartedAt`
- `beforeFinishedAt` / `afterFinishedAt`

```

Reviewer 2: I understand that "filter" is technically accurate, but I'm not sure it's helpful in this context. "filter the task you want to delete" sounds like a much more complex concept than "select the task you want to delete".

For example, to cancel tasks by `uid`:

```bash
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/tasks/cancel?uid=1,2'
```

```json
{
  "taskUid": 1,
  "indexUid": "movies",
  "status": "enqueued",
  "type": "taskCancelation",
  "enqueuedAt": "2021-08-12T10:00:00.000000Z"
}
```

To cancel all enqueued tasks across all indexes in an instance:

```bash
curl \

>   -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/tasks/cancel?status=processing,enqueued'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/tasks/cancel?status=enqueued'
```

```

<!-- The following line should be put in the official release changelogs only -->
Read more about [cancelling tasks]().

Done in #2763 by @irevoire, @Kerollmops and @loiclec.

> ## Delete old processed tasks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Delete the task history
```

Reviewer 2: Perhaps a bit too long?

```suggestion
## Remove finished task from task history
```

This release introduces a new `DELETE` endpoint to the `/tasks` route. You can use it to remove finished tasks (`succeeded`, `failed` or `canceled`) from Meilisearch's task history. This can be helpful in reducing the amount of occupied disk space.

> To delete a finished task, select it by specifying one of the following query parameters: `uid`, `status`, `type`, or `indexUid`. You can also select a task by date using one of the following query parameters: `afterEnqueuedAt`, `afterStartedAt`, `afterFinishedAt`, `beforeEnqueuedAt`,`beforeStartedAt`, or `beforeFinishedAt`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To delete finished tasks, filter them by specifying one of the following query parameters: `uid`, `status`, `type`, or `indexUid`.

Tasks can be filtered by date fields:

- `beforeEnqueuedAt` / `afterEnqueuedAt`
- `beforeStartedAt` / `afterStartedAt`
- `beforeFinishedAt` / `afterFinishedAt`
```

For example, to delete tasks by `uid`:

```bash
curl \
  -X DELETE 'http://localhost:7700/tasks?uid=1,2'
```

```json
{
  "taskUid": 3,
  "indexUid": null,
  "status": "enqueued",
  "type": "taskDeletion",
  "enqueuedAt": "2021-08-12T10:00:00.000000Z"
}
```

To delete all finished tasks in an instance:

```bash
curl \
  -X DELETE 'http://localhost:7700/tasks?status=failed,succeeded,canceled'
```

<!-- The following line should be put in the official release changelogs only -->
Read more about [deleting finished tasks]().

Done in #2763 by @irevoire, @Kerollmops, and @loiclec.

> ## Remove downtime: swap indexes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Deploy indexes with zero downtime
```

> When doing important changes on a primary data store, you need them to be synchronized with Meilisearch. To avoid any downtime, Meilisearch now provides a seamless way to point to a new up-to-date index: swapping indexes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploy new indexes version with zero downtime to the search clients. Meilisearch now provides a seamless way to deploy multiple indexes atomically with the new swap indexes API.
```

<!-- The following line should NOT be put in the official release changelogs -->
📖 Meilisearch's official documentation will be ready for the official v0.30.0 release. Meanwhile, work-in-progress documentation is available [here]().

# New features and improvements 🔥

## Improve search result navigation: create numbered pagination interfaces

You can now use `page` and `hitsPerPage` to fetch the total number of pages and results for a query. These new search parameters can be used in the place of `offset` and `limit` when creating interfaces that require knowing the exhaustive number of search results.

The following example fetches the second page of results for a given query:

```bash
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{ "q": "shifu", "page": "2", "hitsPerPage": "10" }'
```

```json
{
    "hits": [
        // … 10 hits
    ],
    // …
    "page": 2,
    "hitsPerPage": 10,
    "totalHits": 2100,
    "totalPages": 210
}
```

> Done in #2601 by @ManyTheFish.

Author: Opening new discussion regarding [this comment](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions/335#discussioncomment-4041129)
This is currently not easy to understand for people currently doing pagination with Meilisearch before this feature was introduced.

```

<!-- The following line should be put in the official release changelogs only -->
Read more about [swapping indexes]().

Done in #2763 by @irevoire, @Kerollmops, and @loiclec.

## Configuration file support

You can now use a configuration file to set [instance options](https://docs.meilisearch.com/learn/configuration/instance_options.html#all-instance-options).

By default, Meilisearch will search the working directory for a file named `./config.toml`.

You can use the `--config-file-path` option if you want to keep your configuration file in another directory:

```bash
meilisearch --config-file-path="./my-config.toml"
```

Example of configuration file:

```toml
env = "production"
master_key = "MY_MASTER_KEY"
schedule_snapshot = true
```

You can download a default configuration file from our repository:

```bash
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/main/config.toml > config.toml
```

<!-- The following line should be put in the official release changelogs only -->
Read more about [customizing Meilisearch with a configuration file]().

Done in #2745, #2928, #2804, #2841,  and #2961 by @mlemesle, @choznerol, @arriven, @LunarMarathon and @curquiza,

> ## Language improvements
> 
> TBD
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

# v0.30.0 release changelogs

<!-- The following line should NOT be put in the official release changelogs -->
⚠️ Since this is a release candidate (RC), we do NOT recommend using it in a production environment. Something not working as expected? We welcome [bug reports](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/issues/new/choose) and [feedback about new features](https://github.com/meilisearch/product/discussions).

> This release introduces index deployment with zero downtime and adds task management features. It also brings the capability to navigate search results by page selection.

Reviewer: 🥚....🐥

> Thanks to Hacktoberfest, tons of updates and bug fixes have been done by the fantastic Meilisearch community. You were more present than ever and words cannot do justice tojust how grateful we are for your support. A big thank you from the whole Meilisearch team! ❤️

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to Hacktoberfest, tons of updates and bug fixes have been done by the fantastic Meilisearch community. You were more present than ever, and words cannot do justice to just how grateful we are for your support. A big thank you from the whole Meilisearch team! ❤️
```

v0.30 introduces two new search parameters, `page` and `hitsPerPage`. Queries with these parameters return an exhaustive number of `totalHits` and `totalPages`, which you can then use to create UI elements such as numbered page selectors.

The following example fetches the second page of results for a given query:

```bash
curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{ "q": "shifu", "page": "2", "hitsPerPage": "10" }'
```

```json
{
    "hits": [
        // … 10 hits
    ],
    // …
    "page": 2,
    "hitsPerPage": 10,
    "totalHits": 2100,
    "totalPages": 210
}
```

Done in #2601 by @ManyTheFish.

## Cancel processing and enqueued tasks

Meilisearch now allows you to cancel `enqueued` or `processing` tasks through a new API route, `/tasks/cancel`. This can be useful when you need to interrupt a task that is taking too much time to be completed or enqueued by mistake.

> To cancel tasks, filters them by specifying one of the following query parameters: `uid`, `status`, `type`, or `indexUid`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To cancel tasks, filter them by specifying one of the following query parameters: `uids`, `statuses`, `types`, or `indexUids`.
```
All filters use plurals

Tasks can be filtered by date fields:
- `beforeEnqueuedAt` / `afterEnqueuedAt`
- `beforeStartedAt` / `afterStartedAt`

> - `beforeFinishedAt` / `afterFinishedAt`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

You could decide to omit it as the doc team [did](https://github.com/meilisearch/documentation/blob/7ddd504cdc7dd5834931c513b6ac3fb90bfad2eb/reference/api/tasks.md#query-parameters-1). 🤓

For example, to cancel tasks by `uid`:

```bash
curl \

>   -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/tasks/cancel?uid=1,2'

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/tasks/cancel?uids=1,2'
```

```

```json
{
  "taskUid": 1,

>   "indexUid": "movies",

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  "indexUid": "null",
```
`indexUid` is null for global tasks

  "status": "enqueued",
  "type": "taskCancelation",
  "enqueuedAt": "2021-08-12T10:00:00.000000Z"
}
```

To cancel all enqueued tasks across all indexes in an instance:

```bash
curl \

>   -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/tasks/cancel?status=enqueued'

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/tasks/cancel?statuses=enqueued'
```

```

<!-- The following line should be put in the official release changelogs only -->
Read more about [cancelling tasks]().

Done in #2763 by @irevoire, @Kerollmops and @loiclec.

## Delete the task history

This release introduces a new `DELETE` endpoint to the `/tasks` route. You can use it to remove finished tasks (`succeeded`, `failed` or `canceled`) from Meilisearch's task history. This can be helpful in reducing the amount of occupied disk space.

> To delete finished tasks, filter them by specifying one of the following query parameters: `uid`, `status`, `type`, or `indexUid`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To delete finished tasks, filter them by specifying one of the following query parameters: `uids`, `statuses`, `types`, `indexUids`, or `canceledBy`.
```

* Provide Apple Silicon binaries (#2837) @jeertmans
* Add missing environment variables for dump and snapshot features (#2738) @gmourier
* Increase max concurrent readers from 126 to 1024 (#2830) @arriven
* Reduce the size of the Meilisearch binary: allow excluding specialized tokenizations when building binaries (#2773) @jirutka
* Introduce the `snapshotCreation` task type: snapshot tasks are added to the task list, for more transparency (#2763) @Kerollmops
* Reduce the size taken by Meilisearch on the disk space (#2763, meilisearch/milli#639) @loiclec

# Behavior changes ⚠️

* Rename `receivedDocumentIds` into `providedIds` in the task object when performing a [`delete-batch` action](https://docs.meilisearch.com/reference/api/documents.html#delete-documents-by-batch) (#2826) @Ugzuzg
* Change default bind address from `127.0.0.1` to `localhost`, making the default address available in IPv4 and IPv6 (#2861) @Fall1ngStar
* Return a new error when using `/keys` without any master key set: `missing_master_key` instead of `invalid_api_key` (#2922) @vishalsodani
* Some names of filter parameters for `/tasks` and some error `code`s have been renamed (#3023) @Kerollmops @loiclec

>   - `indexUid` query parameter is renamed `indexUids`

Author: ```suggestion
  - `uid` query parameter is renamed `uids`
  - `indexUid` query parameter is renamed `indexUids`
```

This release introduces index deployment with zero downtime and adds task management features. It also brings the capability to navigate search results by page selection.

Thanks to Hacktoberfest, tons of updates and bug fixes have been done by the fantastic Meilisearch community. You were more present than ever, and words cannot do justice to just how grateful we are for your support. A big thank you from the whole Meilisearch team! ❤️

<!-- The following lines should ONLY be put in the official release changelogs -->
🧰 Most integrations (SDKs, clients, libraries) will be compatible with this version within four hours of the release. Sometimes this can take up to 48 hours, depending on the issues we encounter during the release.

<!-- The following lines should ONLY be put in the official release changelogs -->
Here is the exhaustive list of integrations  **not immediately compatible** with v0.30.0:

> - [meilisearch-dart](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch-dart) and [meilisearch-swift](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch-swift): though you can use still use both libraries with v0.30.0, the new available features are not yet available. Let us know if you really need it—and contributions are always welcome!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [meilisearch-dart](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch-dart) and [meilisearch-swift](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch-swift): though you can still use both libraries with v0.30.0, the new available features are not yet available. Let us know if you really need it—and contributions are always welcome!
```
